        Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
        www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
        doi:10.5194/hess-20-73-2016
        ©Author(s) 2016. CC Attribution 3.0 License.
        Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
              1      2       1,3
        M.Garcia ,K.Portney ,andS.Islam
        1Civil & Environmental Engineering Department, Tufts University, 200 College Avenue, Medford, MA 02155, USA
        2Bush School of Government & Public Service, Texas A&M University, 4220 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843, USA
        3The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, 160 Packard Avenue, Medford, MA 02155, USA
        Correspondence to: M. Garcia (margaret.garcia@tufts.edu)
        Received: 29 July 2015 – Published in Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss.: 24 August 2015
        Revised: 1 December 2015 – Accepted: 7 December 2015 – Published: 15 January 2016
        Abstract. Humanandhydrologicalsystemsarecoupled:hu-a result, per capita demand decreases during periods of wa-
        manactivityimpactsthehydrologicalcycleandhydrologicalter stress are more frequent but less drastic and the additive
        conditions can, but do not always, trigger changes in humaneffect of small adjustments decreases the tendency of the sys-
        systems. Traditional modeling approaches with no feedbacktemtoovershootavailablesupplies. This distinction between
        between hydrological and human systems typically cannotthe two policies was not apparent using a traditional noncou-
        offer insight into how different patterns of natural variabil-pled model.
        ity or human-induced changes may propagate through this
        coupled system. Modeling of coupled human–hydrological
        systems, also called socio-hydrological systems, recognizes1Introduction
        the potential for humans to transform hydrological systems
        andforhydrologicalconditionstoinﬂuencehumanbehavior.Humansbothrespondtoandignore changes in environmen-
        However, this coupling introduces new challenges and exist-tal conditions. While humans depend on the natural hydro-
        ing literature does not offer clear guidance regarding modellogical cycle to supply water for both personal and eco-
        conceptualization. There are no universally accepted laws ofnomic health (Falkenmark, 1977), they also depend on an
        humanbehaviorasthereareforthephysicalsystems;further-array of other natural and human resources to maintain and
        more, a shared understanding of important processes withingrow communities. At times water availability can act as the
        the ﬁeld is often used to develop hydrological models, butlimiting constraint, locally preventing or stalling the expan-
        there is no such consensus on the relevant processes in socio-sion of human activity. For example, water availability and
        hydrological systems. Here we present a question driven pro-variability constrained agricultural development in the Tarim
        cess to address these challenges. Such an approach allowsRiver basin in western China before major water storage and
        modeling structure, scope and detail to remain contingenttransport infrastructure was constructed (Liu et al., 2014). At
        on and adaptive to the question context. We demonstrate theother times the water-related risks rise in the background,
        utility of this process by revisiting a classic question in wa-disconnected from decision making, while other priorities
        ter resources engineering on reservoir operation rules: whatprevail. For instance, the level of the Aral Sea has continued
        is the impact of reservoir operation policy on the reliabil-to decline for decades imposing signiﬁcant costs on adjacent
        ity of water supply for a growing city? Our example modelcommunities but no coordinated effort to stop the decline
        couples hydrological and human systems by linking the rateemerged (Micklin, 2007). At still other times public policy
        of demand decreases to the past reliability to compare stan-decisions may work to exacerbate water problems, as when
        dard operating policy (SOP) with hedging policy (HP). Thedecisions are made to keep municipal water prices artiﬁcially
        model shows that reservoir storage acts both as a buffer forlow or when “senior water rights” encourage water usage in
        variability and as a delay triggering oscillations around a sus-the face of shortages (Chong and Sunding, 2006; Hughes et
        tainable level of demand. HP reduces the threshold for actional., 2013; Mini et al., 2014).
        thereby decreasing the delay and the oscillation effect. As
        Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.
      74                  M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
       Human and hydrological systems are coupled. Many im-et al., 2014). At the same time, critique is needed to move
      pacts of human activity on the hydrological system are nowthe ﬁeld forward as the science is new and lacks established
      well documented (Tong and Chen, 2002; Wissmar et al.,protocols. Transparency of the model aims, the development
      2004; Vörösmarty et al., 2010; Vahmani and Hogue, 2014)process,conceptualframeworkandassumptionsarethuspar-
      and there is increasing evidence that how and when hu-ticularly important. A structured but ﬂexible modeling pro-
      mans respond individually and collectively to hydrologicalcess can address these challenges by encouraging modelers
      change has important implications for water resources plan-to clearly deﬁne model objectives, document reasoning be-
      ning, management and policy (Srinivasan et al., 2010; Dihindchoicesofscale,scopeanddetail,andtakeabroadview
      Baldassarre et al., 2013; Elshafei et al., 2014). These obser-of potentially inﬂuential system processes.
      vations have prompted a call to treat humans as an endoge-Inthispaperwepresentaquestiondrivenprocessformod-
      nous component of the water cycle (Wagener et al., 2010;eling socio-hydrological systems that builds on current mod-
      Sivapalan et al., 2012). Representing water systems as cou-eling tools from both domains and allows the ﬂexibility for
      pled human–hydrologicalsystemsorsocio-hydrologicalsys-exploration. Wedemonstratethisprocessbyrevisitingaclas-
      tems with two-way feedback allows new research questionssic question in water resources engineering on reservoir op-
      and potentially transformative insights to emerge.eration rules: the tradeoff between standard operating policy
       Traditional modeling approaches assume that there is no(SOP) and hedging policy (HP). Under SOP, demand is ful-
      feedback between hydrological and human systems and,ﬁlledunlessavailablesupplydropsbelowdemand;underHP,
      therefore, cannot provide insights into how different patternswater releases are reduced in anticipation of a deﬁcit to de-
      of natural variability or human-induced change may prop-crease the risk a large shortfall (Cancelliere et al., 1998). We
      agate through the coupled system. Over short timescales,add to this classic question a linkage between supply relia-
      such as a year, many human and hydrological variablesbility and demand. As this question has been asked by nu-
      can be considered constant and their couplings may be ig-merous researchers before, it offers an excellent opportunity
      nored (Srinivasan, 2015). However, water resources infras-to test the utility of our proposed modeling framework using
      tructure decisions have impacts on longer (decadal to cen-a hypothetical municipality called Sunshine City as a case
      tury) timescales; therefore, there is a need for an approachstudy.
      that can handle not only long-term variability and nonsta-
      tionarity in the driving variables (e.g., precipitation, temper-
      ature, population) but also addresses how these changes can2Modelingsocio-hydrological systems
      propagate through the coupled system, affecting the struc-
      ture and properties of the coupled system (Sivapalan et al.,Modeling the interactions between human and hydrological
      2012; Thompson et al., 2013). Dynamic modeling of socio-systemsexacerbateschallengesfoundinmodelingpurelyhy-
      hydrological systems recognizes the potential for humans todrological systems including setting the model boundary, de-
      transform hydrological systems and for hydrological condi-terminingtherelevantprocessesandrelationshipsandclearly
      tions to inﬂuence human behavior. While human behaviorcommunicating model framing and assumptions. Common
      is usually incorporated into a model through scenarios, sce-approaches to hydrological modeling are reviewed to put
      narios cannot include two-way feedback. Building effects ofsocio-hydrological modeling in the context of hydrological
      human behavior into a simulation model can enable testingmodeling practice. Next, modeling approaches used in sys-
      of feedback cycles and can illuminate the impact of feed-tem dynamics and social-ecological systems science, both
      back and path dependencies that are not easily identiﬁable inof which address coupled systems, are described. Then,
      scenario-based modeling.  socio-hydrological modeling approaches are reviewed and
       Coupled modeling, on the other hand, introduces newgaps identiﬁed. While no one approach is directly trans-
      challenges. First, it is not possible to exhaustively modelferrable to socio-hydrological systems, practices from hy-
      complex systems such as the coupled human–hydrologicaldrological modeling, along with those from integrative dis-
      system (Sterman, 2000; Schlüter et al., 2014). Bounds mustciplines, serve as a baseline for comparison and inform our
      be set to develop an effective model but researchers are chal-socio-hydrological modeling process. We then present our
      lenged to objectively deﬁne the scope of coupled modelingrecommendations for socio-hydrological model conceptual-
      studies. Second, by deﬁnition coupled models cross disci-ization.
      plines and modelers are unable to point to the theoretical
      framework of any single discipline to defend the relevant2.1Modelinghydrological systems
      scope (Srinivasan, 2015). At the same time researchers must
      balance the scope and level of detail in order to create aIn hydrology the basic steps of model development are
      parsimonious and communicable model. Finally, critical as-(a) data collection and analysis, (b) conceptual model devel-
      sessment of models is more challenging when the theories,opment, (c) translation of the conceptual model to a mathe-
      empirical methods and vocabulary drawn upon to create andmatical model, (d) model calibration and (e) model valida-
      communicateamodelspandisciplinaryboundaries(Schlütertion (Blöschl and Sivapalan, 1995). While the basic steps
      Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
      M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process75
      of model development are generally accepted, in practicethe sawmill industry in the northeastern United States focus
      approaches diverge, particularly in conceptual model de-on understanding if the system has the structural potential to
      velopment. In hydrology, Wheater et al. (1993) identiﬁedovershoot sustainable yield. While the resulting model is a
      four commonly used modeling approaches: physics-based,signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation of a complex system, the reason for
      concept-based (also called conceptual), data driven and hy-inclusion of tree growth dynamics, mill capacity and lumber
      brid data–conceptual. Physics-based models represent a sys-prices and the exclusion of other variables is clear. Second,
      tembylinkingsmall-scalehydrologicalprocesses(Sivapalansystem dynamics and social-ecological systems science use
      et al., 2003). Concept-based models use prior knowledge tomultiple data sources, both quantitative and qualitative, to
      specify the inﬂuential processes and determine the structure.specify and parameterize model relationships. Omitting in-
      Data driven models are derived primarily from observationsﬂuential relationships or decision points due to lack of quan-
      and do not specify the response mechanism. Hybrid data–titative data results in a greater error than their incorrect spec-
      conceptual models use data and prior knowledge to inferiﬁcation (Forrester, 1992). Third, system dynamics focuses
      modelstructure(Wheateretal.,1993;Sivapalanetal.,2003).ondevelopingadynamichypothesisthatexplainsthesystem
       Modeling purpose typically determines the modeling ap-behaviorofinterest in terms of feedback processes (Sterman,
      proach. Environmental models may be developed to formu-2000). Finally, social-ecological systems science has found
      late and test theories or to make predictions (Beven, 2002).that the use of frameworks as part of a structured model de-
      Physics-based models can be used to test theories aboutvelopment process can aid transparency and comparability
      small-scale processes or to predict catchment response byacross models (Schlüter et al., 2014).
      scaling up these processes. Concept-based models hypoth-
      esize the important elements and processes and their struc-2.3Progress and gaps in socio-hydrological modeling
      ture of interaction to answer a question or predict a certain
      property, although hypotheses are often not explicitly statedSeveral research teams have operationalized the concepts
      and tested (Wheater et al., 1993). A reliance on prior knowl-of socio-hydrology using approaches ranging from simple
      edge limits the applicability of concept-based modeling ingeneric models to contextual data-driven models. Di Baldas-
      ﬁelds lacking consensus on both the presence and relevancesarre et al. (2013) developed a simple generic model to ex-
      of feedback processes. Data driven models are effective inplore the dynamics of human–ﬂood interactions for the pur-
      prediction. While they have potential for hypothesis testing,pose of showing that human responses to ﬂoods can exacer-
      a focus on black box input–output models limits insight intobate ﬂooding problems. Viglione et al. (2014) extended this
      system processes and the ability to extrapolate beyond ob-worktotesttheimpactofcollectivememory,risk-takingatti-
      served data (Sivapalan et al., 2003). Hybrid data–conceptualtudeandtrustinriskreductionmeasuresonhuman–ﬂooddy-
      models use data and other knowledge to generate and testnamics. Kandasamyetal.(2014)analyzedthepast100years
      hypotheses about the structure of the system (Wheater et al.,of development in the Murrumbidgee River basin in eastern
      1993; Young, 2003). As socio-hydrology is a new area of re-Australia and built a simple model of the transition from the
      search, prior knowledge alone is insufﬁcient and the focusdominanceofagriculturaldevelopmentgoals,throughaslow
      is on modeling to enhance understanding through hypothesisrealization of adverse environmental impacts, to emergence
      generationandtesting;hybriddata–conceptualmodelingtac-ofseriousecologicalrestorationefforts.Elshafeietal.(2014)
      tics aimed at enhancing understanding therefore inform ourproposed a conceptual socio-hydrological model for agricul-
      proposed process.         tural catchments and applied it to the Murrumbidgee and the
                                Lake Toolibin basins; they then built upon this conceptual
      2.2Modelingcoupledsystems model to construct a detailed semi-distributed model of the
                                Lake Toolibin basin (Elshafei et al., 2015). Srinivasan and
      While coupling of natural and human systems is in its in-collaborators analyzed water security in the city of Chennai,
      fancy in hydrology, there is a strong tradition of studyingIndia. By modeling the feedback between household level
      coupled systems in the ﬁelds of system dynamics and social-copingmechanismsandregional-scalestressors,theteamex-
      ecological systems. These ﬁelds have developed approachesplained the counterintuitive effects of policy responses such
      to understand and model complex systems and can informas the observation that reduced groundwater recharge caused
      a socio-hydrological modeling process. First, in both ﬁeldsby ﬁxing leaky pipelines decreased a household’s ability to
      the research question or problem drives modeling decisions.usewellstocopewithwatersysteminterruptions(Srinivasan
      Much of the work to date on socio-hydrological systems iset al., 2010, 2013).
      exploratory and aims to explain evidence of system couplingResearchers have also addressed the methodological ques-
      seen in case data. Developing a model to answer a questiontions of how to frame and model socio-hydrological sys-
      or solve a problem allows a more structured and defensibletems. Blair and Buytaert (2015), provide a detailed review
      framework to support the modeling decisions and providesof the model types and modeling methods used in socio-
      a benchmark for model validation (Sterman, 2000; Hinkelhydrology and those that may have utility in the ﬁeld. Siva-
      et al., 2015). For example, Jones et al. (2002), in modelingpalanandBlösch(2015)offerguidanceonframingandmod-
      www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
      76                  M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
      eling socio-hydrological systems from stating framing as-Blöschl, 2015). However, complex systems such as socio-
      sumptions to model validation techniques and highlight thehydrological systems cannot be modeled exhaustively (Ster-
      speciﬁc challenges of scale interactions found in these cou-man, 2000; Schlüter et al., 2014). Rather, model conceptu-
      pled systems. Elshafei et al. (2014) and Liu et al. (2014) de-alization must balance sufﬁcient process representation and
      tailed the development of conceptual models, giving readersparsimony (Young et al., 1996; Ostrom, 2007).
      insight into the framing of their case study work.Model conceptualization is based on general assumptions
       Thesemethodological advances have begun to address theabout how a system works. Often these assumptions are im-
      many challenges of translating the concept of feedback be-plicit and not challenged by others within the same research
      tween human and hydrological systems into actionable sci-community (Kuhn, 1996). This works well when research
      ence. However, obstacles remain: principally, expanding thestays within the bounds of the existing methods, theories
      scope of modeling to include societal systems and humanand goals of one’s research community; when working in
      decision-making exacerbates the challenges of setting thenew intellectual territory, research community norms can-
      model boundary and process detail, and of evaluating thosenot be relied upon to guide assumptions. Further disciplinary
      choices. The source of this challenge is twofold. First, theretraining is highly successful at teaching these community
      are fundamental differences between natural and social sys-norms, and researchers working on interdisciplinary projects
      tems. The laws governing physical, chemical and biologicalmust actively question the framing assumptions they bring
      systemssuchasconservationofmassandenergyarebroadlyto the project (Lélé and Norgaard, 2005; McConnell et al.,
      applicable across contexts; the relevance of rules inﬂuenc-2009). By its integrative nature, socio-hydrological model-
      ing social systems varies by context. Second, the modelinging crosses disciplines and modelers are unable to point to
      of coupled human–hydrological systems is new intellectualthe theoretical framework of any single discipline to make
      territory. At this intersection the norms and unstated assump-simplifying assumptions (Srinivasan, 2015). In absence of
      tions instilled by disciplinary training must be actively ques-research community norms, we must return to modeling fun-
      tioned and examined within a transparent model develop-damentals. Models are simpliﬁcations of real systems that,
      ment, testing and validation process.in a strict sense, cannot be validated but the acceptability of
       There are no universally accepted laws of human behaviormodel assumptions for the question at hand can be assessed
      as there are for the physical and biological sciences (Loucks,(Sterman, 2000). Careful articulation of the research ques-
      2015). While institutions (formal and informal rules) inﬂu-tions links the assessment of important variables and mech-
      ence behavior, the impact of institutions on the state of theanisms to the question context. This allows the critique to
      systemdependsonwhetherpeoplefollowtherules(Schlagerfocus on the acceptability of these choices relative to model
      and Heikkila, 2011). Additionally, these rules are not static.goals and enables critical assessment of the range of appli-
      In response to outcomes of past decisions or changing con-cability of identiﬁed processes through case and model com-
      ditions, actors change both the rules that shape the optionsparison.
      available for practical decisions and the rules governing theThe recent Water Resources Research Debate Series of-
      collective choice process throughwhichtheseoperationrulesfers an excellent illustration of this point. Di Baldassarre
      are made (McGinnis, 2011). Furthermore, water policy de-et al. (2015) catalyze the debate by presenting a generic
      cisions are not made in isolation of other policy decisions.model of human–ﬂood interaction. This model incorporates
      Decisions are interlinked as the same actors may interactboth the “levee effect”, in which periods of infrequent ﬂood-
      with and get affected differently depending on the contextsing (sometimes caused by ﬂood protection infrastructure) in-
      (McGinnis, 2011b). The outcome of a related policy deci-crease the tendency for people to settle in the ﬂoodplain, and
      sion mayalter the choices available to actors or the resourcesthe “adaptation effect”, in which the occurrence of ﬂooding
      available to address the current problem. The state of the hy-leads to an adaptive response. In the model they link ﬂood
      drological system, particularly during extreme events, canfrequency and adaptive action through a social memory vari-
      spark institutional changes; yet, other factors such as polit-able which increases with the occurrence of ﬂoods and de-
      ical support and ﬁnancial resources as well as the prepared-caysslowlyovertime;ﬂoodoccurrencedirectlytriggerslevee
      ness of policy entrepreneurs also play a role (Crow, 2010;heighteningintechnologicalsocietiesandindirectly, through
      Hughes et al., 2013). Given this complexity, Pahl-Wostl etthe social memory, decreases ﬂoodplain population density
      al. (2007) argue that recognizing the unpredictability of pol-(Di Baldassarre et al., 2015).
      icy making and social learning would greatly improve theIn the debate this modeling approach is both commended
      conceptualization of water management. Nevertheless, someas an impressive innovation and critiqued for its simpli-
      dynamics persist across time and space; water managementﬁcation of social dynamics (Gober and Wheater, 2015;
      regimes persist for decades or centuries and some transitionsLoucks,2015;Sivapalan,2015;Troyetal.,2015).Goberand
      in different locations share characteristics (Elshafei et al.,Wheater (2015) note that while social or collective memory
      2014;Kandasamyetal.,2014;Liuetal.,2014).Furthermore,is an important factor in ﬂood resilience it does not determine
      modeling is a useful tool to gain insight into the impactsﬂood response; ﬂood awareness may or may not result in an
      of these dynamics (Thompson et al., 2013; Sivapalan andadaptive response based on the way individuals, the media
      Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
       M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process77
       and institutions process the ﬂood threat, the social capacityRESEARCH QUESTION
       for adaptation and the preparedness of policy entrepreneurs,
       among other factors. Loucks (2015) observes that data on
       past behavior is not necessarily an indicator of future be-VARIABLES & RELATIONSHIPSOUTCOME INDICATORS
       havior and suggests that observing stakeholder responses to
       simulated water management situations may offer additional
       insight. Troy et al. (2015) and Di Baldassarre et al. (2015)ASONINGASONING
       note that the human–ﬂood interaction model presented rep-PROCESSESPROCESSES
       resents a hypothesis of system dynamics which allows forARD REARD RE
       exploration, and that simple stylized models enable gener-W W
                                        OR                         CK
       alization across space and time. In sum, the debate presentsFA
                                          OUTCOME INDICATORSVARIABLES & RELATIONSHIPSB
       different perspectives on the acceptability of the modeling
       assumptions.
        A close look at how the debate authors critique and
       commend the human–ﬂood interaction model illustratesCONCEPTUAL MODEL
       that the acceptability of modeling assumptions hingesFigure 1. Backward-reasoning process (adapted from Schlüter et
       upon the model’s intended use. For example, Gober andal., 2014).
       Wheater(2015)critique the simplicity of social memory as a
       proxy for social system dynamics but acknowledge the util-
       ity of the model in clarifying the tradeoffs of different ap-
       proaches to meet water management goals. As we can neveredge is insufﬁcient (Arocha et al., 1993). As few researchers
       have comprehensive representation of a complex and cou-have expert knowledge of all domains involved in socio-
       pled human–hydrological system, we need transparency ofhydrological modeling and data is often sparse, a backward-
       the abstracting assumptions and their motivation. This is notreasoning approach is here used to conceptualize a socio-
       a new insight; however, a question driven modeling processhydrological model. Additionally, this outcome-oriented ap-
       allows the ﬂexibility and transparency needed to examine theproach will focus the scope of the model on the question’s
       acceptability of model assumptions while acknowledging therelevant variables and processes.
       role of context and the potential for surprise.The research question helps to deﬁne the outcome met-
                                       ric(s) of interest; however, determining the relevant processes
       2.4Aquestiondrivenmodelingprocessand variables requires further analysis. One tool to identify
                                       inﬂuential processes and variables is the dynamic hypothe-
       Our proposed process begins with a research question. Thesis. A dynamic hypothesis is a working theory, informed by
       research question is then used to identify the key outcomedata, of how the system behavior in question arose (Sterman,
       metric(s). A dynamic hypothesis is developed to explain the2000). It is dynamic in nature because it explains changes
       behavior of the outcome metric over time; a framework canin behavior over time in terms of the structure of the system
       be used to guide and communicate the development of the(Stave, 2003). The dynamic hypothesis could encompass the
       dynamic hypothesis. Remaining model processes are thenentire socio-hydrological model, but in practice many pro-
       speciﬁed according to established theory.cesses within a model will be based on established theory
        As emphasized by both system dynamics and social-such as rainfall runoff or evaporation processes. The intent is
       ecological systems researchers, the research question drivesto focus the dynamic hypothesis on a novel theory explaining
       the process of system abstraction. One way to think aboutobserved behavior. Stating the dynamic hypothesis clariﬁes
       this process of abstraction is through the lens of forwardwhich portion of the model is being tested.
       and backward reasoning. Schlüter et al. (2014) introducedAframeworkcanaidthedevelopment of the dynamic hy-
       the idea of forward and backward reasoning to develop con-potheses and the communication of the reasoning behind
       ceptual models of social-ecological systems. In a backward-it. The use of frameworks enhances the transparency of
       reasoning approach, the question is ﬁrst used to identify in-modeldevelopmentbyclearly communicating the modeler’s
       dicators or outcome metrics; next, the analysis proceeds tobroad understanding of a system. Socio-hydrological model-
       identify the relevant processes and then the variables anders can develop their own framework (Elshafei et al., 2014)
       their relationships, as seen in Fig. 1 (Schülter et al., 2014).ordrawonexistingframeworksthataddresscoupledhuman–
       These three pieces then form the basis for the conceptualhydrological systems such as the social-ecological systems
       model. In contrast, a forward-reasoning approach begins(SES) framework, the management transition framework,
       withtheidentiﬁcation of variables and relationships and thenor the integrated structure–actor–water framework (Ostrom,
       proceeds toward outcomes. Forward reasoning is most suc-2007; Pahl-Wostl et al., 2010; Hale et al., 2015).
       cessful when there is expert knowledge of the system, andTo illustrate how a framework may be used in model con-
       backward-reasoning is useful primarily when prior knowl-ceptualization we will focus on the SES framework. The SES
       www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
         78                            M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
         framework is a nested conceptual map that partitions the at-Table 1. Summary of Sunshine City properties.
         tributes of a social-ecological system into four broad classes:
         (1) resource system, (2) resource units, (3) actors and (4) theSunshine City properties
         governance system (McGinnis and Ostrom, 2014). Each ofVariable Value   Units
         the four top tier variables has a series of second tier (and po-      3 −1
         tentially higher tier) variables; for example, storage charac-Blue River mean ﬂow2km yr
                                                                               3 −1
         teristics and equilibrium properties are second tier attributesBlue River variance0.5km yr
         of the resource system (Ostrom, 2009). The SES frameworkBlue River lag 1 autocorrelation0.6–
                                                                                 −1
         prescribes a set of elements and general relationships to con-Average evaporation rate1myr
         sider when studying coupled social and ecological systemsPopulation1000000people
         (Ostrom, 2011). The variables deﬁned in the SES frame-Average annual growth rate3%
                                                                               3 −1
         work were found to impact the interactions and outcomes ofPer capita water usage400m yr
                                                                                 −3
         social-ecological systems in a wide range of empirical stud-Water price0.25USDm
         ies (Ostrom, 2007). In addition to specifying candidate vari-Reservoir capacity0.2km3
         ables, the SES framework speciﬁes broad process relation-Reservoir slope0.1–
         ships (Schlüter et al., 2014). At the broadest level, SES spec-
         iﬁes that the state of the resource system, governance system,responsible for setting water efﬁciency codes and other con-
         resource unit properties and actor characteristics inﬂuenceservationrules.Thecurrentbuildingcodeincludesonlybasic
         interactions and are subsequently inﬂuencedbytheoutcomesefﬁciencies required by the national government. The Blue
         of those interactions. To operationalize the SES frameworkRiver, along with other regional sources, is fully allocated
         for model conceptualization one must move down a levelmakingfutureaugmentationofsuppliesunlikely.SeeTable1
         to assess the relevance of the tier two variables against caseaboveforasummaryofkeycharacteristicsofSunshineCity.
         data and background knowledge. This review aims to checkAlong with the rest of the region, Sunshine City’s popula-
         the dynamic hypothesis against a broader view of coupledtion, and its water demand, has grown rapidly over the past
         system dynamics and to inform determination of remainingfew years. Managers at the Water Utility are concerned they
         model processes.                       will no longer be able to meet its reliability targets as de-
          The following case presents the development of a socio-mands rise and have added a reservoir to increase future re-
         hydrological (coupled) and a traditional (noncoupled) modelliability. They now must decide how to operate the reservoir
         to illustrate this process. While this process is developed toand are considering two options: standard operating policy
         study real-world cases a hypothetical case is used here for(SOP) and hedging policy (HP). The selected operating pol-
         simplicity, brevity and proof of concept.icy must satisfy downstream user rights and maintain min-
                                                imum ecological ﬂows. In addition to meeting the legal re-
         3 Sunshine City: a case study of reservoir operationsquirements, the Water Utility managers are concerned with
                                                ﬁnding a policy that will enable the city to provide the most
         Sunshine City is located in a growing region in a semi-aridreliable water supply throughout the lifetime of the reservoir
         climate. The region is politically stable, technologically de-(50–100 years). From experience they have observed that
         veloped, with a market economy governed by a representa-both water price and reliability affect demand. A key puz-
         tive democracy. Sunshine City draws its water supply fromzle that emerges for water managers from this experience is:
         the Blue River, a large river which it shares with downstreamhowdooperational rules governing use of water storage in-
         neighbors. The water users must maintain a minimum ﬂowﬂuence long-term water supply reliability when consumers
         in the Blue River for ecological health. Sunshine City canmake water usage decisions based on both price and relia-
         draw up to 25% of the annual ﬂow of the Blue River in anybility?
         given year. A simple prediction of the year’s ﬂow is made byAs the question implies, the Water Utility managers have
         assuming that the ﬂow will be equal to the previous year’sa working hypothesis relating demand change with water
         ﬂow; the resulting errors are corrected by adjusting the nextshortages. Therefore, along with the research question the
         year’s withdrawal.                     following dynamic hypothesis is considered: the occurrence
          The city’s Water Utility is responsible for diverting, treat-of water shortages increases the tendency of users to adopt
         ing and transporting water to city residents and businesses.water conservation technologies and to make long-term be-
         It is also tasked with making infrastructure investment deci-havioral changes. HP triggers shortages sooner than SOP
         sions, setting water prices. Water users receive plentiful sup-thus triggering earlier decreases in demand.
         ply at cost and there have been no shortages in recent years.
         While located in a semi-arid environment, the large size of
         Sunshine City’s Blue River water availability and allocation
         created a comfortable buffer. The city’s Water Utility is also
         Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016        www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
           M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process                              79
                                                  1                                                1
             ASE                 DP             1              ASEDP                              1
             RELE                                              RELE
                                                  VMAX
                             DP                       + DP                                          VMAX
                   1                                                               KPDP                 + DP
                                                                        1
                  1                                                  KP
                   S
                    T
                     ORA
                        GE A
                            T THE EN
                                   D OF PREVIOUS                     S
                                                                      T
                                                                       ORA
                                                                          GE A
                                                                             T THE EN
                                                                                     D OF PREVIOUS 
                    PERIOD PL
                             US PREDICTED IN
                                            FL
                                             O
                                              W                       PERIOD PL
                                                                               US PREDICTED IN
                                                                                             FL
                                                                                               O
                                                                                                W
           Figure2.Standardoperatingpolicy, where D is per capita demand,Figure 3. Hedging policy, where Kis hedging release function
           P is population and Vis reservoir capacity (adapted from Shih              P
                          max                                slope (adapted from Shih and ReVelle, 1994).
           and ReVelle, 1994).
                                                             nonlinear and convex; in other words that a severe shortage
           3.1 Background                                    has a larger impact than the sum of several smaller short-
                                                             ages (Shih and ReVelle, 1994). Gal (1979) showed that the
           Thedecision of how much water to release for use each timewater shortage loss function is convex, thereby proving the
           period is deceptively complex due to the uncertainty of fu-utility of hedging as a drought management strategy. Other
           ture streamﬂows and the nonlinear beneﬁts of released waterresearchers have shown that hedging effectively reduces the
           (Shih and ReVelle, 1994; Draper and Lund, 2004). In mak-maximum magnitude of water shortages and increases total
           ing release decisions, water utilities must fulﬁll their man-utility over time (Shih and ReVelle, 1994; Cancelliere et al.,
           date to maintain a reliable water supply in a ﬁscally efﬁcient1998). More recent work by Draper and Lund (2004) and
           manner. Reliability is the probability that the system is inYou and Cai (2008) conﬁrms previous ﬁndings and demon-
           a satisfactory state (Hashimoto et al., 1982). In this case, astrates the continued relevance reservoir operation policy se-
           satisfactory system state is one in which all demands on thelection.
           system can be met. The deﬁnition of an unsatisfactory stateResearchers and water system managers have for decades
           is more nuanced. Water shortages have a number of charac-sought improved policies for reservoir operation during
           teristics that are important to water management includingdroughtperiods(Boweretal.,1962;ShihandReVelle,1994;
           frequency, maximum shortage in a given time period, andYou and Cai, 2008). We add to this classic question the ob-
           length of shortage period (Cancelliere et al., 1998). Long-servation that water shortages inﬂuence both household con-
           term reliability here refers to the projected reliability overservation technology adoption rates and water use behav-
           several decades. The time frame used for long-term projec-ior. In agreement with Giacomoni et al. (2013), we hypoth-
           tions varies between locations and utilities (i.e., Boston usesesize that the occurrence of water shortages increases the
           a 25-year time frame, Denver uses a 40-year time frame, andtendency of users to adopt water conservation technologies
           Las Vegas uses a 50-year time frame) and a 50-year timeandtomakelong-termbehavioralchanges.Householdwater
           frame is used here (MWRA, 2003; SNWA, 2009; Denverconservation technologies include low ﬂow faucets, shower
           Water, 2015).                                     heads and toilets, climatically appropriate landscaping, grey
             Twooperationalpolicies,SOPandHP,arecommonlyused water recycling and rainwater harvesting systems (Schuetze
           to address this decision problem. Under SOP, demand is al-and Santiago-Fandiño, 2013). The adoption rates of these
           ways fulﬁlled unless available supply drops below demand;technologies are inﬂuenced by a number of factors includ-
           under HP, water releases are limited in anticipation of an ex-ing price, incentive programs, education campaigns and peer
           pected deﬁcit (Cancelliere et al., 1998). Hedging is used asadoption (Campbell et al., 2004; Kenney et al., 2008). A re-
           a way to decrease the risk of a large shortfall by imposingview of studies in the US, Australia and UK showed that
           conservation while stored water remains available. Figures 2the installation of conservation technologies results in indoor
           and3illustrate SOP and HP, respectively. For this simple ex-water savings of 9–12% for ﬁxture retroﬁts and 35–50%
           periment only linear hedging, where K is the slope of thefor comprehensive appliance replacements (Inman and Jef-
                                         P
           release function, is tested.                      frey, 2006). In some cases offsetting behavior reduces these
             Thetraditional argument for hedging is that it is economi-potential gains; however, even with offsetting, the adoption
           cal to allow a small deﬁcit in the current time period in orderof conservation technologies still results in lower per capita
           to decrease the probability of a more severe shortage in a fu-demands (Geller et al., 1983; Fielding et al., 2012). Wa-
           ture time periods (Bower et al., 1962). This argument holdster use behavior encompasses the choices that individuals
           true if the loss function associated with a water shortage ismake related to water use ranging from length of showers
           www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/                      Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
       80                     M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
       Table 2. Household conservation action by shortage experienceally experienced a water shortage and which, if any, house-
       (ISTPP, 2013).                 hold efﬁciency upgrade or behavioral change actions their
                                      household had taken in the past year. Efﬁciency upgrade op-
        Last experiencedPercent of households, over thetions offered included low-ﬂow shower heads, low-ﬂush toi-
        a water shortagepast year, that havelets and changes to landscaping; behavioral options given in-
                    invested inchangedtakencluded shorter showers, less frequent dishwasher or wash-
                  efﬁcient ﬁxtureswater usenoing machine use, less frequent car washing and changes to
                   or landscapesbehavioractionyard watering (ISTPP, 2013). As seen in Table 2, respon-
        Within a year  56%  88% 11%   dents who had recently experienced a water shortage were
        1–2years ago   52%  87% 11%   more likely to have made efﬁciency investments and to have
        2–5years ago   51%  78% 17%   changed their water use behavior. This ﬁnding is corrobo-
        6–9years ago   50%  79% 18%   ratedbyarecentsurveyofColoradoresidents.Ofthe72%of
        10 or more years ago42%74%24% respondents reporting increased attention to water issues, the
        Never experienced36%66% 31%   most-cited reason for the increase (26% of respondents) was
                                      a recent drought or dry year (BBC Research, 2013). Other
                                      reasons cited by an additional 25% of respondents including
       and frequency of running the dishwasher to timing of lawnnews coverage, water quantity issues and population growth
       watering and frequency of car washing. Water use behaviormayalsoberelated water shortage concerns or experiences.
       is shaped by knowledge of the water system, awareness ofThe increased receptivity of the public to water conserva-
       conservation options and their effectiveness, and consumer’stion measures and the increased willingness of water users
       attitudes toward conservation (Frick et al., 2004; Willis etto go along with these measures during shortage events com-
       al., 2011). Changes to water use behavior can be promptedbine to drive changes in per capita demands. The combined
       by price increases, education campaigns, conservation reg-effect of these two drivers was demonstrated in a study
       ulations and weather (Campbell et al., 2004; Kenney et al.,of the Arlington, Texas, water supply system (Giacomoni
       2008; Olsmtead and Stavins, 2009).et al., 2013; Kanta and Zechman, 2014). Additional exam-
        As a city begins to experience a water shortage, the wa-ples of city- and regional-scale drought response leading to
       ter utility may implement water restrictions, price increases,long-term demand decreases include the droughts of 1987–
       incentive programs or education campaigns to inﬂuence con-1991andthemid-2000sinCalifornia and of 1982–1983 and
       sumer behavior. While staff within the water utility or city1997–2009inAustralia(Zilbermanetal.,1992;Turral,1998;
       may have planned these measures before, the occurrence ofSivapalan et al., 2012; Hughes et al., 2013). It is often dif-
       a water shortage event, particularly if it aligns with otherﬁcult to separate the relative effects of the multiple price
       driving forces, offers a window of opportunity to implementand nonprice approaches applied by water utilities during
       sustainable water management practices (Jones and Baum-droughts (Olmstead and Stavins, 2009). The point is, how-
       gartner, 2005; Hughes et al., 2013). In addition, water usersever, that the response generally points to lower per capita
       are more likely to respond to these measures with changeswater demands.
       in their water use behavior and/or adoption of conservationOneexampleoflasting water use reductions after a short-
       technologies during shortages. Baldassare and Katz (1992)ageisthe1987–1992droughtinLosAngeles,California.An
       examined the relationship between the perception of risk toextensive public awareness and education campaign sparked
       personal well-being from an environmental threat and adop-bothbehavioralchangesandtheadoptionofefﬁcientﬁxtures
       tion of environmental practices with a personal cost (ﬁnan-such as low-ﬂow shower heads and toilets and increasing
       cial or otherwise). They found that the perceived level of en-block pricing introduced after the drought helped maintain
       vironmental threat is a better predictor for individual envi-conservation gains (LADWP, 2010). Evidence of the lasting
       ronmental action, including water conservation, than demo-effect can be seen in Fig. 4. Per capita water demands do not
       graphic variables or political factors. Illustrating this effect,return to 1990 levels after the drought ends in 1992. Note that
       MankadandTapsuwan(2011)foundthatadoptionofalterna-the data below also contains a counter example. The 1976–
       tive water technologies, such as on-site treatment and reuse,1977 drought caused a sharp drop in water consumption in
       is increased by the perception of risk from water scarcity.LosAngeles;however,consumptionquicklyreturnedtopre-
        Evidence of individual level behavior change can also bedrought levels when the rainfall returned in 1978. While the
       seenintheresultsofa2013nationalwaterpolicysurveycon-1976–1977 drought was more intense than any year in the
       ducted by the Institute for Science, Technology and Public1987–1992 drought, the long duration of the later drought
       Policy at Texas A&M University. The survey sampled overcaused deeper draw downs in the city’s water reserves ul-
       3000 adults from across the United States about their atti-timately prompting transformative action (LADWP, 2010).
       tudes and actions related to a variety of water resources andThis may indicate that the impact of the 1976–1977 drought
       public policy issues. Included in the survey were questionswas below the threshold for signiﬁcant action or that other
       that asked respondents how recently, if ever, they person-priorities dominated public attention and resources at the
       Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
             M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process                                               81
               )200                                                     characteristics and water demand to interactions; other vari-
               y
               a                                                        ables were modiﬁed to reﬂect the language typically used
                d
               r
               e                                                        in the water sciences (i.e., supply in place of harvesting).
                p150
               s                                                        See Table 3 for urban water speciﬁc modiﬁcation of the SES
               n
               o
               l
               l                                                        framework.
               a
               g
                (100                                                      We then assess the relevance of the tier two variables
               d
               n
               a                                                        against case data and background knowledge (summarized
               m                                                        in Sects. 3 and 3.1, respectively) by beginning with the out-
                de50
               a
               t                                                        come metric, reliability. Within the framework reliability is
               i
               p                                                        an outcome variable, speciﬁcally a social performance met-
                ca
               r
               e 0                                                      ric, and it is the direct result of water supply and water de-
               P
                   1970       1980       1990       2000      2010      mand interaction processes. Water supply encompasses the
                                         Year                           set of utility level decisions on reservoir withdrawals and
             Figure4.HistoricalcityofLosAngeleswateruse(LADWP,2010).    discharges. As detailed in the case description, these deci-
                                                                        sions are shaped by the selected reservoir operating policy,
                                                                        streamﬂow, the existing environmental ﬂow and downstream
             time. In sum, the Los Angeles case serves both to illustrateallocation requirements, reservoir capacity, water in storage
             that hydrological change can prompt long-term changes in   and water demands. Streamﬂow is a stochastic process that
             water demands and as a reminder that multiple factors inﬂu-is a function of many climatic, hydraulic and land surface
             ence water demands and hydrological events will not always parameters. However, given the driving question and the as-
             dominate.                                                  sumption that the city represents only a small portion of the
                                                                        overall watershed, a simple statistical representation is sufﬁ-
             3.2  Modeldevelopment                                      cient and streamﬂow is assumed independent of other model
                                                                        variables.
             The Sunshine City water managers want to understand how      Total water demand is a function of both population and
             theoperationalrulesgoverninguseofwaterstorageinﬂuence      per capita demand. As described in the background section,
             long-termwatersupplyreliabilitywhenconsumersmakewa-        per capita water demand changes over time in response to
             ter usage decisions based on price and reliability. A modelhousehold level decisions to adopt more water efﬁcient tech-
             can help the managers gain insight into system’s behavior  nologies and water use behavior change made by individuals
             by computing the consequences of reservoir operation pol-  in each time interval; these decisions may be inﬂuenced by
             icy choice over time and under different conditions. As de-conservation policies. As conditions change water users re-
             scribed in the background section, many supply side and de-assess the situation and, if they choose to act, decide between
             mand side factors affect water system reliability. However,available options such as investment in efﬁcient technology,
             not all variables and processes are relevant for a given ques-changing water use behavior and, in extreme cases, reloca-
             tion. A question driven modeling process uses the question totion. Therefore, per capita demand is a function of price and
             determine model boundary and scope rather than beginning   historic water reliability as well as available technologies,
             withapriorunderstandingoftheimportantvariablesandpro-      and water user’s perception of the water system. Since the
             cesses. A question driven process is here used to determinefocus of the question is on system wide reliability individ-
             the appropriate level of system abstraction for the Sunshineual level decisions can be modeled in the aggregate as to-
             City reservoir operations model.                           tal demand, which is also inﬂuenced by population. Popu-
               Fromthe research question it is clear that reliability is thelation increases in proportion to the current population, as
             outcome metric of interest and that the model must test forregional economic growth is the predominant driver of mi-
             the hypothesized link between demand changes and reliabil- gration trends. However, in extreme cases, perceptions of re-
             ity. Reliability, as deﬁned above, is the percent of time that allsource limitations can also inﬂuence growth rates. The SES
             demandscanbemet.TheSESframeworkisusedtoguidethe            variables used in the conceptual model are highlighted in Ta-
             selection of processes and variables, including the dynamicble 3 and the resulting processes are summarized in Fig. 5.
             hypothesis. Given this wide range, the framework was then    Only a subset of the variables and processes articulated in
             comparedagainst the variables and processes found to be in-the SES framework are included in the conceptual model;
             ﬂuential in urban water management and socio-hydrological  other variables and processes were considered but not in-
             studies (Brezonik and Stadelmann, 2002; Abrishamchi et al.,cluded. For example, economic development drives increas-
             2005; Padowski and Jawitz, 2012; Srinivasan et al., 2013;  ing per capita water demands in many developing regions
             DawadiandAhmad,2013;Elshafeietal.,2014;Goberetal.,         but the relationship between economic growth and water de-
             2014; Liu et al., 2014; Pande et al., 2013; van Emmerik et mands in highly developed regions is weaker due to the in-
             al., 2014). Based on this evaluation two second tier variablescreased cost of supply expansion and greater pressure for
             wereaddedtotheframework:landusetotheresourcesystem         environmental protection (Gleick, 2000). The income elas-
             www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/                                  Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
            82                                        M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
            Table 3. SES framework, modiﬁed for urban water systems.
                    First tier variables Second tier variables           Third tier variables (examples)
                    Socio, economic      S1–Economicdevelopment          Per capita income
                    and political settingsS2–Demographictrends           Rapid growth
                                         S3–Political stability          Frequency of government turnover
                                         S4–Othergovernancesystems       Related regulations
                                         S5–Markets                      Regional water markets
                                         S6–Mediaorganizations           Mediadiversity
                                         S7–Technology                   Infrastructure, communications
                                1
                    Resource systems     RS1–Typeofwaterresource         Surface water, groundwater
                                         RS2–Clarityofsystemboundaries   Groundwater–surface water interactions
                                         RS3–Sizeofresourcesystem        Watershed or aquifer size
                                         RS4–Human-constructedfacilities Type, capacity, condition
                                         RS5–Catchmentlanduse            Urbanization, reforestation
                                         RS6–Equilibriumproperties       Meanstreamﬂow,sustainable yield
                                         RS7–Predictability of system dynamicsData availability, historic variability
                                         RS8–Storagecharacteristics      Natural/built, volume
                                         RS9–Location
                    Governance systems2  GS1–Governmentorganizations     Public utilities, regulatory agencies
                                         GS2–Nongovernmentorganizations  Advocacygroups, private utilities
                                         GS3–Networkstructure            Hierarchy of organizations
                                         GS4–Water-rights systems        Prior appropriation, beneﬁcial use
                                         GS5–Operational-choice rules    Water use restrictions, operator protocol
                                         GS6–Collective-choice rules     Deliberation rules, position rules
                                         GS7–Constitutional-choice rules Boundary rules, scope rules
                                         GS8–Monitoringandsanctioning rulesEnforcement responsibility
                              3
                    Resource units       RU1–Interbasin connectivity     Infrastructure, surface–groundwater interactions
                                         RU2–Economicvalue               Water pricing, presence of markets
                                         RU3–Quantity                    Volumeinstorage, current ﬂow rate
                                         RU4–Distinctive characteristics Water quality, potential for public health impacts
                                         RU5–SpatialandtemporaldistributionSeasonal cycles, interannual cycles
                    Actors               A1–Numberofrelevantactors
                                         A2–Socioeconomicattributes      Education level, income, ethnicity
                                         A3–Historyorpastexperiences     Extreme events, government intervention
                                         A4–Location
                                         A5–Leadership/entrepreneurship  Presence of strong leadership
                                         A6–Norms(trust-reciprocity)/social capitalTrust in local government
                                         A7–Knowledge ofSES/mentalmodels Memory,mentalmodels
                                         A8–Importanceofresource (dependence)Availability of alternative sources
                                         A9–Technologiesavailable        Communication technologies, efﬁciency technologies
                                         A10–Values                      Preservation of cultural practices
                    Action situations:   I1 – Water supply               Withdrawal, transport, treatment, distribution
                                      4
                    interactions → outcomesI2 – Information sharing      Public meetings, word of mouth
                                         I3 – Deliberation processes     Ballot initiatives, board votes, public meetings
                                         I4 – Conﬂicts                   Resource allocation conﬂicts, payment conﬂicts
                                         I5 – Investment activities      Infrastructure construction, conservation technology
                                         I6 – Lobbying activities        Contacting representatives
                                         I7 – Self-organizing activities Formation of NGOs
                                         I8 – Networking activities      Online forums
                                         I9 – Monitoring activities      Sampling, Inspections, self-policing
                                         I10 – Water demand              Indoor/Outdoor, residential/commercial/industrial
                                         O1–Socialperformancemeasures    Efﬁciency, equity, accountability
                                         O2–Ecologicalperformance measuresSustainability, minimum ﬂows
                                         O3–Externalities to other SESs  Ecosystem impacts
                    Related ecosystems   ECO1–Climatepatterns            El Niño impacts, climate change projections
                                         ECO2–Pollutionpatterns          Urban runoff, upstream discharges
                                         ECO3–FlowsintoandoutoffocalSES  Upstream impacts, downstream rights
                   Note: variables added are in italic, variables key to the conceptual model are in bold. Examples of third tier variables are given for clariﬁcation. 1 Resource system variables
                   removed or replaced: productivity of system. 2 Governance system variables removed or replaced: property. 3 Resource unit variables removed or replaced: resource unit
                   mobility, growth or replacement rate, interaction among resource units, number of units. 4 Interaction and outcome variables removed or replaced: harvesting.
            Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016                            www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
            M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process                                       83
                                                              Reservoir
                                  +                       -   storage                       +
                        Reservoir storageWater supply                  +
                           -                      Water demand         Water supply
                                           -
                                   -                  +         -         -     Populaion   +      Growth Rate
                        Water            Water shortage
                       demand                       Populaion         Water shortage
                             -           +                 -           +
                                 Shortage                     Shortage                     +
                                 awareness                    awareness
            Figure 5. Causal loop diagrams: (a) water demand, shortage and conservation; (b) water demand, shortage and population; (c) population
            and growth rate.
            Table 4. State and exogenous model variables.
                                   VariableDescription           Units     Equation Variable Type
                                   Q       Streamﬂow             km3yr−1   1        Exogenous
                                   V       Reservoir storage volumekm3     2        State
                                   P       Population            Persons   3        State
                                   W       Withdrawal            km3yr−1   4        State
                                   S       Shortage magnitude    km3yr−1   5        State
                                   M       Shortage awareness              6        State
                                                                  3  −1
                                   D       Per capita demand     m yr      7        State
            ticity of water can lead to increased water demands if ratescharacteristics may change over the 50-year timescale in re-
            do not change proportionally (Dalhuisen et al., 2003); heresponse to watershed wide land use changes and global-scale
            prices are assumed to keep pace with inﬂation. Given thisclimatic changes. Streamﬂow properties are ﬁrst considered
            assumption, and the focus on a city in a developed region,stationary parametersinordertounderstandtheimpactofthe
            economic development likely plays a minor role. Similarly,selected operating policy in isolation from land use and cli-
            group decision-making and planning processes such as pub-mate change. Climate scenarios or feedbacks between popu-
            lic forums, voting and elections can shape the responses tolation and land use can be introduced in future applications of
            reliability changes over time. This model aims to answer athe model to test their impact on system performance. Reser-
            question about the impact of a policy not the ease or like-voir operating policy, summarized as the hedging slope, KP,
            lihood of its implementation. Once the policy is establishedis considered a parameter in the model. Alternate values of
            through whatever process that is used, the question here fo-parameter K are tested but held constant during the study
                                                                             P
            cuses on its efﬁcacy. Therefore, group decision-making pro-period to understand the long-term impacts of selecting a
            cesses need not be included.                           given policy. Reservoir properties such as capacity and slope
              In addition to determining the appropriate level of detailare also held constant to hone in on the effect of operating
            of the conceptual model, we must determine which variablespolicy. See Tables 4 and 5 for a summary of variable types.
            changeinresponsetoforcesoutsidethemodelscope(exoge-    Fromthesemodelrelationships, general equations are devel-
            nous variables), which variables must be modeled endoge-oped by drawing from established theory, empirical ﬁndings
            nously (state variables) and which can be considered con-and working hypotheses.
            stants (parameters). Again the nature of the question alongStreamﬂow, Q, is modeled using a ﬁrst-order autoregres-
                                                                                                       3  −1
            withthetemporalandspatialscaleinformsthesedistinctions.sive model, parameterized by mean (µ km yr), standard
                                                                                 3  −1             H
            Variables such as stored water volume, per capita water de-deviation (σH km yr) and lag one autocorrelation (ρH).
            mand and shortage awareness will clearly change over theThe ﬁnal term, a , is a normally distributed random variable
                                                                                 t
            50-year study period. The population of the city is also ex-with a mean zero and a standard deviation of 1.
            pected to change over the study period. Under average hy-Q =ρ (Q    −µ )+σ 1−p20.5a +µ               (1)
            drological conditions the population growth rate is expectedtH   t−1   H     H      H    t    H
            to be driven predominately by regional economic forces ex-Ateachtimesteptheamountofwaterinstorage,V,inthe
            ogenous to the system; however, under extreme conditionsreservoir is speciﬁed by a water balance equation, where W
            water supply reliability can inﬂuence the growth rate. There-              3          −1
                                                                   is water withdrawal (km ), η(kmyr )isevaporation,Ais
            fore, population is considered a state variable. Streamﬂow    2        3      H                        3
                                                                   area (km ), Q (km )isdownstreamdemandandQ (km )
                                                                              D                               E
            www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/                            Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
            84                                       M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
            Table 5. Model parameters.
                            ParametersDescription                    Value     Units          Equation
                                                                              3  −1
                            µH        Meanstreamﬂow                    2.0  km yr                  1
                                                                              3  −1
                            σH        Standard deviation of streamﬂow  0.5  km yr                  1
                            ρH        Streamﬂowlagoneautocorrelation   0.6        –                1
                                                                                 −1
                            η         Evaporation rate               0.001   kmyr                  2
                             H                                                    3
                            Q         Downstreamallocation          0.50Q       km                 2
                             D                                                    3
                            Q         Required environmental ﬂow    0.25Q       km                 2
                             E
                            σT        Average slope of reservoir       0.1        –  Stage–storage curve
                                                                                 −1
                            δ         Regional birth rate             0.04     yr                  3
                            I                                                    −1
                            δ         Regional death rate             0.03     yr                  3
                            E                                                    −1
                            δ         Regional immigration rate       0.05     yr                  3
                            I                                                    −1
                            δ         Regional emigration rate        0.03     yr                  3
                            E
                            τP        Threshold                        0.4        –                3
                            V         Reservoir capacity               2.0      km3                4
                             max
                            KP        Hedging slope                Variable       –                5
                            µS        Awareness loss rate             0.05     yr−1                6
                            αD        Fractional efﬁciency adoption rate0.15      –                7
                            βD        Background efﬁciency rate     0.0001        –                7
                                                                              3  −1
                            D         Minimumwaterdemand              200    m yr                  7
                             MIN
            is the required environmental ﬂow.                    ﬁcation links the damping effect to perceived shortage risk.
                                                                  dP    P [δ −δ +δ −δ ]
                                                                     =    t [ B D   I  E           ]              (3)
                                                                         P δ −δ +δ(1−M)−δ (M) forM ≥τ
            dV =Q −W −η A −Q −Q                             (2)    dt     t ( B  D)  I     t   E  t       t  P
             dt    t    t   H t     D    E                          Water withdrawals, W, are determined by the reservoir
                                                                  operating policy in use. As there is only one source, water
              Population is the predominant driver of demand in thewithdrawn is equivalent to the quantity supplied. The pre-
            model. Population (P) changes according to average birthdicted streamﬂow for the coming year is 0.25×Qt−1, ac-
            (δB, yr−1), death (δD, yr−1), emigration (δE, yr−1) and immi-counting for both downstream demands and environmental
            gration (δ , yr−1) rates. However, immigration is dampenedﬂowrequirements.UnderSOP,K isequaltoonewhichsets
                    I                                                                         P
            andemigrationacceleratedbyhighvaluesofperceivedshort- withdrawals equal to total demand, DP (per capita demand
            age risk, as would be expected at extreme levels of resourcemultiplied by population), unless the stored water is insuf-
            uncertainty (Sterman, 2000). The logistic growth equation,ﬁcient to meet demands. Under HP, withdrawals are slowly
            which simulates the slowing of growth as the resource car-decreased once a pre-determined threshold, K DP, has been
                                                                                                        P
            rying capacity of the system is approached, serves as the ba-passed. For both policies excess water is spilled when stored
            sis for the population function. While the logistic functionwater exceeds capacity, V.
                                                                                       max
            is commonly used to model resource-constrained populationW =                                          (4)
            growth, the direct application of this function would be in-t
                                                                     V +0.25Q    −V      for V +0.25Q    ≥
            appropriate for two reasons. First, an urban water system is t   t−1   max       t       t−1
                                                                  
                                                                                            DtPt +Vmax
            an open system; resources are imported into the system at a
                                                                   DP                   for DP +V     >
            cost and people enter and exit the system in response to re-tt                    t t   max
                                                                                             V +0.25Q    ≥K DP
                                                                                             t       t−1    P t t
                                                                  
            ductions in reliability and other motivating factors. Second, V +0.25Q
                                                                   t         t−1
                                                                                        for K DP >V +0.25Q
            individuals making migration decisions may not be aware       KP                  P  t t   t       t−1
            of incremental changes in water shortage risk; rather, per-When the water withdrawal is less than the quantity de-
            ceptions of water stress drive the damping effect on net mi-mandedbytheusers, a shortage, S, occurs.
            gration. Finally, only at high levels does shortage perception
            inﬂuence population dynamics. To capture the effect of the D P −W      for D P >W
                                                                  S =     t t    t      t t    t                  (5)
            opensystem,logisticdampingisappliedonlytoimmigration   t     0          otherwise
            driven population changes when shortage perception crosses
            a threshold, τP. To account for the perception impact, theDi Baldassarre et al. (2013) observed that in ﬂood plain
            shortage awareness variable, M, is used in place of the ratiodynamics awareness of ﬂood risk peaks after a ﬂood event.
            of population to carrying capacity typically used; this modi-This model extends that observation to link water shortage
            Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016                          www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
         M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process            85
         events to the awareness of shortage risk. The ﬁrst term inis removed as it no longer drives population and demand
         the equation is the shortage impact which is a convex func-changes. Instead the model assumes that population growth
         tion of the shortage volume. The economic utility of hedgingis constant at 3% and that per capita demands decrease by
         hingesontheassumptionthattheleastcostlyoptionstoman-0.5% annually. While these assumptions may be unrealis-
         age demand will be undertaken ﬁrst. As both water utilitiestic they are not uncommon. Utility water management plans
         and water users have a variety of demand management andtypically present one population and one demand projection.
         conservation options available and both tend to use optionsReservoir storage, water withdrawals and shortages are com-
         from most to least cost-effective, a convex shortage loss isputed according to the equations described above. A full list
         also applicable to the water users (Draper and Lund, 2004). Itof model variables and parameters can be found in Tables 4
         is here assumed that the contribution of an event to shortageand 5, respectively.
         awareness is proportional to the shortage cost. At high levels
         of perceived shortage risk only a large shortage will lead to3.3Results
         a signiﬁcant increase in perceived risk. The adaptation cost
         is multiplied by one minus the current shortage awareness toThemodelwasrunforSOP(KP=1)andthreelevelsofHP
         account for this effect. The second term in the equation in-where level one (K =1.5) is the least conservative, level
                                  −1                          P
         corporates the decay of shortage, µS (yr), awareness andtwo (KP =2) is slightly more conservative and level three
         its relevance to decision making that occurs over time (Di(K =3)isthemostconservative hedging rule tested. Three
                                                   P
         Baldassarre et al., 2013).               trials were conducted with a constant parameter set to under-
         dM    S 2                              stand the system variation driven by the stochastic stream-
            =    t   1−M −µ M                (6)  ﬂow sequence and to test if the relationship hypothesized
          dt   DP (      t )S  t                  wasinﬂuential across hydrological conditions. For each trial
                t t
           Historically, in developed regions per capita water de-streamﬂow, reservoir storage, shortage awareness, per capita
         mandshavedecreasedovertimeastechnologyimprovedanddemand, population and total demand were recorded and
         aswaterusepracticeshavechanged.Asdescribedabove,thisplotted. As a comparison, each trial was also run in the non-
         decrease is not constant but rather is accelerated by shocks tocoupled model in which demand and population changes are
         the system. To capture this effect there are two portions toexogenous.
         the demand change equation: shock-stimulated logistic de-In the ﬁrst trial, shown in Fig. 6a, there were two sus-
         cay with a maximum rate of α (yr−1) and a background de-tained droughts in the study period: from years 5 to 11 and
         cayrate, β (yr−1). Per capita water demand decrease acceler-then from years 33 to 37. Higher than average ﬂows in the
         ates in a time interval if water users are motivated by recentyears preceding the ﬁrst drought allowed the utility to build
         personal experience with water shortage (i.e., M>0). As aupstoredwaterasseeninFig.6b.Thestorageactsasabuffer
         certain amount of water is required for basic health and hy-and the impacts are not passed along to the water users until
         giene, there is ultimately a ﬂoor to water efﬁciencies, speci-year 18 under SOP. Under HP the impacts, as well as wa-
                      3  −1                       ter users’ shortage awareness, increase in years 15, 13 and
         ﬁed here as D(km yr). Reductions in per capita water
                  min                             12 based on the level of the hedging rule (slope of K ) ap-
         usagebecomemorechallengingasthisﬂoorisapproached;a                        P
         logistic decay function is used to capture this effect. When noplied, as shown in Fig. 6c. The impact of this rising shortage
         recent shortages have occurred (i.e., M = 0), there is still aawareness on per capita water demands is seen in the accel-
         slow decrease in per capita water demands. This backgrounderation of the decline in demands in Fig. 6d. This demand
         rate, β, of demand decrease is driven by both the replacementdecrease is driven by city level policy changes such as price
         of obsolete ﬁxtures with modern water efﬁcient ﬁxtures andincreases and voluntary restrictions in combination with in-
         the addition of new more efﬁcient building stock. This back-creased willingness to conserve.
         ground rate is similarly slowed as the limit is approached;Theimpactsofthisdecreaseonindividualwateruserswill
         this effect is incorporated by using a percentage-based back-dependontheirsocio-economiccharacteristics as well as the
         ground rate. Note that price is not explicitly included in thisparticular policies implemented. While the aggregation hides
         formulation of demand. As stated above, because price andthis heterogeneity, it should be considered in the interpreta-
         nonprice measures are often implemented in concert it is dif-tion of these results. The increased shortage awareness also
         ﬁcult to separate the impacts of these two approaches and inhas a small dampening effect on population growth during
         this case unnecessary.                   and directly after the ﬁrst drought (Fig. 6e). Changes to both
                                                  per capita demands and population result in total demand
         dD           D                       changes (see Fig. 6f). After the ﬁrst drought the system be-
            =−D Mα 1− min +β                 (7)
          dt    t  t     D                        gins to recover under each of the three hedging policies as
                          t                       evidenced by the slow increase in reservoir storage. How-
           As a comparison, a noncoupled model was developed. Inever, as streamﬂows ﬂuctuate around average streamﬂow and
         this model, population and demand changes are no longertotal demands now surpass the average allocation, reservoir
         modeled endogenously. The shortage awareness variablestorage does not recover when no hedging restrictions are
         www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/          Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
        86                        M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
        Figure 6. Model results, trial 1: (a) annual streamﬂow, (b) reser-Figure 7. Model results, trial 2: (a) annual streamﬂow, (b) reser-
        voir storage volume, (c) public shortage awareness, (d) per capitavoir storage volume, (c) public shortage awareness, (d) per capita
        demand, (e) annual city population, (f) total demand.demand, (e) annual city population, (f) total demand.
        imposed. Several years of above average ﬂow ending in yearIn the third and ﬁnal trial there is no signiﬁcant low ﬂow
        29drive further recovery. The second prolonged drought hasperiod until year 36 of the simulation when a moderate
        the most pronounced effect under the SOP scenario. Short-drought event occurs, as shown in Fig. 8a. Earlier in the
        age impacts are drastic, driving further per capita demandsimulation minor ﬂuctuations in streamﬂow only trigger an
        decreases and a temporary decline in population. A slightacceleration of per capita demand declines under the level
        population decrease is also seen under level one hedging butthree HP, as seen in Fig. 8c and d. A moderate drought begins
        theresultsdemonstratethatallhedgingstrategiesdampenthein year 36. However, the reservoir levels drop and shortage
        effect.                           awareness rise starting before year 20, as seen in Fig. 8b and
         In the second trial there are two brief droughts in the be-c. Then when the drought occurs the impacts are far greater
        ginning of the study period, beginning in years 4 and 10, asthan in the comparably moderate drought in trial 1 because a
        seen in Fig. 7a. Under SOP and the ﬁrst two hedging policiesprolonged period of steady water supply enabled population
        there is no change in operation for the ﬁrst drought and thegrowth and placed little pressure on the population to reduce
        reservoir is drawn down to compensate as seen in Fig. 7a–b.demands.IntheSOPscenario,thesystemwasinshortagebe-
        Only under the level three HP are supplies restricted, trig-fore the drought occurred and total demands peaked in year
        gering an increase in shortage awareness and a subsequent30 at 0.82km3. The subsequent drought exacerbated an ex-
        decrease in per capita demands, as found in Fig. 7c and d.isting problem and accelerated changes already in motion.
        Whentheprolonged drought begins in year 20, the four sce-Figure 9 presents results of the noncoupled model simula-
        narios have very different starting points. Under SOP, theretion. While the control model was also run for all three trials,
                  3
        is less than 0.5km of water in storage and total annual de-the results of only trial three are included here for brevity.
        mands are approximately 0.65km3. In contrast, under theIn the noncoupled model, HP decreases water withdrawals
        level three HP there is 1.4km3 of water in storage and to-as reservoir levels drop and small shortages are seen early
                              3
        tal annual demands are just under 0.6km . Predictably, thein the study period, as seen in Fig. 9b and c. In the second
        impacts of the drought are both delayed and softened underhalf of the study period signiﬁcant shortages are observed, as
        HP. As the drought is quite severe, all scenarios result in ain Fig. 9c. However, inspection of the streamﬂow sequence
        contraction of population. However, the rate of decrease andreveals no severe low ﬂow periods indicating that the short-
        total population decrease is lowered by the use of HP.ages are driven by increasing demands, as in Fig. 9a. As ex-
        Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016  www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
       M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process87
       Figure 8. Model results, trial 3: (a) annual streamﬂow, (b) reser-Figure 9. Noncoupled model results, trial 3: (a) annual stream-
       voir storage volume, (c) public shortage awareness, (d) per capitaﬂow, (b) reservoir storage volume, (c) shortage volume (demand–
       demand, (e) annual city population, (f) total demand.supply), (d) per capita demand, (e) annual city population, (f) total
                                    demand.
       pected, changes to per capita demands, population, and total
       demandsaregradualandconsistentacrosstheoperatingpol-lationships and the variables excluded during the manuscript
       icy scenarios, found in Fig. 9e and f.reviewprocessindicatethatsometransparencywasachieved.
                                    However, the reader is in the best position to judge success
                                    onthis third aim.
       4Discussion                   A socio-hydrological model of the Sunshine City water
                                    system was developed using the question driven modeling
       The proposed question driven modeling process has threeprocess and compared to a noncoupled model. The noncou-
       aims: to broaden the researcher’s view of the system, topled model included assumes that both population growth
       connect modeling assumptions to the model’s purpose andand per capita demand change can be considered exogenous
       to increase the transparency of these assumptions. A socio-to the system. Both models show, as prior studies demon-
       hydrological model was developed to examine the differ-strated, that by making small reductions early on HP re-
       ence in long-term reliability between two reservoir operatingducesthechanceofsevereshortages.Thesocio-hydrological
       policies, SOP and HP. This question focused the conceptualmodel also demonstrates that in the HP scenarios the mod-
       model on processes inﬂuencing reliability at the city scaleerate low ﬂow events trigger an acceleration of per capita
       over the 50-year planning period. As part of the conceptualdemand decrease that shifts the trajectory of water demands
       model development, the SES framework was used to checkand in some instances slows the rate of population growth.
       framing assumptions. The wide range of candidate variablesIn contrast, SOP delays impacts to the water consumers and
       included in the SES framework was reviewed against casetherefore delays the shift to lower per capita demands. When
       data and background information. The model’s intended useextremeshortageevents,suchasadeeporprolongeddrought
       then informed decisions of which processes to include in theoccur, the impacts to the system are far more abrupt in the
       model, which processes were endogenous to the system andSOPscenariobecausepercapitademandsandpopulationare
       whichvariables could be held constant. The point here is nothigherthaninhedgingscenariosandthereislessstoredwater
       that the logic presented by the modeler using this processavailable to act as a buffer. When we compare SOP and HP
       is unfailing but that it is clear and can inform debate. Theusing a socio-hydrological model we see that HP decreases
       questions raised about both the functional form of model re-the magnitude of the oscillations in demand and population.
       www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
      88                  M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
      Hedgingreducesthethresholdforaction, thereby decreasingtaining a given policy and the conditions in which policy
      the delay and the oscillation effect. This distinction betweenchange would be beneﬁcial. Despite these drawbacks a sim-
      the two policies was not apparent when using a traditionalple hypothetical model is justiﬁed here to clearly illustrate
      noncoupled model. The signiﬁcance of this observation isthe proposed modeling process.
      that a decrease in oscillation means a decrease in the mag-There are several limitations to the hypothetical case of
      nitude of the contractions in population and per capita waterSunshine City. First, the hypothetical nature of the case pre-
      demandsrequired to maintain sustainability of the system. Itcludes hypothesis testing. Therefore, an important extension
      is these abrupt changes in water usage and population thatof this work will be to apply the modeling process pre-
      water utilities and cities truly want to avoid as they wouldsented here on a real case to fully test the resulting model
      hampereconomicgrowthanddecreasequality of life.against historical observations before generating projections.
       Examining the structure of the system can explain the dif-Second, only one set of parameters and functions was pre-
      ferencesinsystemresponsetoSOPandHP.AsseeninFig.5,sented. Future extensions to this work on reservoir policy
      there are one positive and two negative feedback loops in theselection will test the impact of parameter and function se-
      system. Positive feedback loops, such as population in thislection through sensitivity analysis. Finally, we gain limited
      model,exhibit exponential growth behavior but there are fewunderstandingofthepotentialofthemodeldevelopmentpro-
      truly exponential growth systems in nature and through in-cess by addressing only one research question. We can fur-
      teraction with other feedback loops most systems ultimatelyther test the ability of the modeling process to generate new
      reach a limit (Sterman, 2000). Negative feedback loops gen-insights by developing different models in response to dif-
      erate goal seeking behavior. In its simplest form a negativeferent questions. In this case, the narrow scope of the driv-
      feedback loop produces a slow approach to a limit or goaling question leads to a model that just scratches the surface
      akin to an exponential decay function. In this case, the goalof socio-hydrological modeling as evidenced by the narrow
      of the system is to match total demand with average sup-rangeofsocietalvariablesandprocessesincluded.Forexam-
      ply. The fact that supply is driven by streamﬂow, a stochasticple, this model does not address the ability of the water utility
      variable, adds noise to the system. Even if streamﬂow is cor-or city to adopt or implement HP. HP impacts water users in
      rectly characterized with stationary statistics, as is assumedthe short term. These impacts would likely generate a mix
      here, the variability challenges the management of the sys-of reactions from water users and stakeholders making it im-
      tem. Reservoir storage helps utilities manage this variabilitypossible to ignore politics when considering the feasibility of
      by providing a buffer but it also acts as a delay. The delayHP. However, the question driving this model asks about the
      between a change in the state of the system and action takenimpact of a policy choice on the long-term reliability of the
      in response allows the system to overshoot its goal value be-system not the feasibility of its implementation. A hypothe-
      fore corrective action is taken, leading to oscillation aroundsis addressing the feasibility of implementation would lead
      goal values. While water storage decreases the impact of ato a very different model structure.
      drought, changes to water consumption patterns are requiredWhilethereis signiﬁcant room for improvement, there are
      to address demand driven shortages. Water storage simulta-inherent limitations to any approach that models human be-
      neously buffers variability and delays water user response byhavior. The human capacity to exercise free will, to think
      delaying impact. There are parallels between the feedbackcreatively and to innovate means that human actions, particu-
      identiﬁed in this urban water supply system and the feedbacklarly under conditions not previously experienced, are funda-
      identiﬁed by Elshafei et al. (2014) and Di Baldassarre (2013)mentally unpredictable. Furthermore, as stated above we can
      in agricultural water management and human–ﬂood interac-never fully capture the complexity of the socio-hydrological
      tions, respectively. Broadly, the three systems display the bal-system in a model. Instead we propose a modeling process
      ancebetweentheinteractionbetweenopposingforces,inthisthat focuses socio-hydrological model conceptualization on
      case articulated as positive and negative feedback loops.answering questions and solving problems. By using model
       The case of Sunshine City is simpliﬁed and perhaps sim-purpose to drive our modeling decisions we provide justi-
      plistic. The limited number of available options for actionﬁcation for simplifying assumptions and a basis for model
      constrains the system and shapes the observed behavior. Inevaluation.
      many cases water utilities have a portfolio of supply, stor-
      age and demand management policies to minimize short-
      ages. Additionally, operating policies often shift in response5Conclusions
      to changing conditions. However, in this case no supply side
      projects are considered and the reservoir operating policy isHuman and water systems are coupled. The feedback be-
      assumed constant throughout the duration of the study pe-tween these two subsystems can be, but are not always,
      riod. As there are physical and legal limits to available sup-strong and fast enough to warrant consideration in water
      plies the ﬁrst constraint reﬂects the reality of some systems.planning and management. Traditional, noncoupled, model-
      Constant operational policy is a less realistic constraint buting techniques assume that there is no signiﬁcant feedback
      can offer new insights by illustrating the limitations of main-between human and hydrological systems. They therefore
      Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
       M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process89
       offer no insights into how changes in one part of the sys-References
       tem may affect another. Dynamic socio-hydrological model-Abrishamchi, A. and Tajrishi, M.: Inter-basin water transfer in Iran,
       ing recognizes and aims to understand the potential for feed-in: Water Conservation, Reuse, and Recycling, Proceeding of
       backsbetweenhumanandhydrologicalsystems.Bybuildingan Iranian American workshop, The National Academies Press,
       human dynamics into a systems model, socio-hydrologicalWashington, DC, 252–271, 2005.
       modeling enables testing of hypothesized feedback cyclesArocha, J. F., Patel, V. L., and Patel, Y. C.: Hypothesis generation
       and can illuminate the way changes propagate through theandthecoordination of theory and evidence in novice diagnostic
       coupled system.               reasoning, Med. Decis. Making, 13, 198–211, 1993.
        Recent work examining a range of socio-hydrologicalBaldassare, M. and Katz, C.: The personal threat of environmental
       systems demonstrates the potential of this approach. How-problems as predictor of environmental practices, Environ. Be-
       ever, there are signiﬁcant challenges to modeling socio-hav., 24, 602–616, 1992.
       hydrological systems. First, there are no widely acceptedBBC Research: Public Opinions, Attitudes, and Awareness
       laws of human systems as there are for physical or chemicalRegarding Water in Colorado, Final Report Prepared for
       systems. Second, common disciplinary assumptions must bethe Colorado Water Conservation Board, available at: http:
       questioned due to the integrative nature of socio-hydrology.//www.bbcresearch.com/images/Final_Report_072213_web.pdf
       Transparencyofthemodeldevelopmentprocessandassump-(last access: 1 July 2015), 2013.
       tions can facilitate the replication and critique needed toBeven, K.: Towards a coherent philosophy for modelling
       move this young ﬁeld forward. We assess the progress andtheenvironment,P.Roy.Soc.A,458,2465–2484,
       gaps in socio-hydrological modeling and draw lessons fromdoi:10.1098/rspa.2002.0986, 2002.
       adjacent ﬁelds of study, hydrology, social-ecological systemsBlair, P. and Buytaert, W.: Modelling socio-hydrological systems: a
       science and system dynamics, to inform a question drivenreview of concepts, approaches and applications, Hydrol. Earth
                                     Syst. Sci. Discuss., 12, 8761–8851, doi:10.5194/hessd-12-8761-
       model development process. We then illustrate this process2015, 2015.
       by applying it to the hypothetical case of a growing city ex-Blöschl, G. and Sivapalan, M.: Scale issues in hydrolog-
       ploring two alternate reservoir operation rules.icalmodelling: a review, Hydrol. Process., 9, 251–290,
        By revisiting the classic question of reservoir operationdoi:10.1002/hyp.3360090305, 1995.
       policy, we demonstrate the utility of a socio-hydrologicalBower, B. T., Hufschmidt, M. M., and Reedy, W. W.: Operating
       modeling process in generating new insights into the im-procedures: their role in the design of water-resources systems
       pacts of management practices over decades. This socio-by simulation analyses, in: Design of Water-Resource Systems,
       hydrological model shows that HP offers an advantage notHarvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA, 443–458, 1962.
       detected by traditional simulation models: it decreases theBrezonik,P.L.andStadelmann,T.H.:Analysisandpredictivemod-
       magnitude of the oscillation effect inherent in goal seekingels of stormwater runoff volumes, loads, and pollutant concen-
       systems with delays. Through this example we identify onetrations from watersheds in the Twin Cities metropolitan area,
                                     Minnesota, USA, Water Res., 36, 1743–1757, 2002.
       class of question, the impact of reservoir management policyCampbell,H.E.,Johnson,R.M.,andLarson,E.H.:Prices,devices,
       selection over several decades, for which socio-hydrologicalpeople, or rules: the relative effectiveness of policy instruments
       modeling offers advantages over traditional modeling. Thein water conservation, Rev. Policy Res., 21, 637–662, 2004.
       model developed, and the resulting insights, are contingentCancelliere, A., Ancarani, A., and Rossi, G.: Susceptibility of water
       uponthequestioncontext.Thedynamicsidentiﬁedheremaysupply reservoirs to drought conditions, J. Hydrol. Eng., 3, 140–
       be more broadly applicable but this is for future cases and148, 1998.
       models to assess.            Chong,H.andSunding,D.:Watermarketsand
                                     trading,Annu.Rev.Env.Resour.,31,239–264,
                                     doi:10.1146/annurev.energy.31.020105.100323, 2006.
       TheSupplementrelatedtothisarticle is available onlineCrow,D.A.:PolicyEntrepreneurs,Issue Experts, and Water Rights
       at doi:10.5194/hess-20-73-2016-supplement.Policy Change in Colorado, Rev. Policy Research, 27, 299–315,
                                     doi:10.1111/j.1541-1338.2010.00443.x, 2010.
                                    Dalhuisen, J. M., Florax, R. J. G. M., de Groot, H. L. F.,
                                     and Nijkamp, P.: Price and Income Elasticities of Residential
                                     Water Demand: A Meta-Analysis, Land Econ., 79, 292–308,
       Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Brian Fath, Wei Liu,doi:10.2307/3146872, 2003.
       and Arnold Vedlitz for reviewing an early version of this paper. WeDawadi, S. and Ahmad, S.: Evaluating the impact of demand-side
       would also like to thank the two reviewers for their careful readingmanagement on water resources under changing climatic condi-
       and thoughtful comments. Financial support for this researchtions and increasing population, J. Environ. Manage., 114, 261–
       comesfromtheNSFWaterDiplomacyIGERTgrant(0966093).75, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2012.10.015, 2013.
                                    Denver Water: Long-range Planning, available at: http://www.
       Edited by: M. Sivapalan       denverwater.org/SupplyPlanning/Planning/, last access: 1 July,
                                     2015.
                                    Di Baldassarre, G., Viglione, A., Carr, G., Kuil, L., Salinas, J.
                                     L., and Blöschl, G.: Socio-hydrology: conceptualising human-
       www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
       90                    M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
        ﬂood interactions, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 17, 3295–3303,study socio-hydro-ecological systems, Earth’s Future, 110–132,
        doi:10.5194/hess-17-3295-2013, 2013.doi:10.1002/2014EF000295, 2015.
       Di Baldassarre, G., Viglione, A., Carr, G., Kuil, L., Yan,Hinkel, J., Schleuter, M., and Cox, M.: A diagnostic procedure
        K., Brandimarte, L., and Blöschl, G.: Debates–Perspectivesfor applying the social–ecological systems framework in diverse
        on socio-hydrology: Capturing feedbacks between physicalcases, Ecol. Soc., 20, 32, doi:10.5751/ES-07023-200132, 2015.
        and social processes, Water Resour. Res., 51, WR016416,Hughes, S., Pincetl, S., and Boone, C.: Triple exposure: reg-
        doi:10.1002/2014WR016416, 2015.ulatory, climatic, and political drivers of water management
       Draper, A. J. and Lund, J. R.: Optimal hedging and carryover stor-changes in the city of Los Angeles, Cities, 32, 51–59,
        age value, J. Water Res. Pl.-ASCE, 130, 83–87, 2004.doi:10.1016/j.cities.2013.02.007, 2013.
       Elshafei, Y., Sivapalan, M., Tonts, M., and Hipsey, M. R.: A pro-Inman, D. and Jeffrey, P.: A review of residential water conserva-
        totype framework for models of socio-hydrology: identiﬁca-tion tool performance and inﬂuences on implementation effec-
        tion of key feedback loops and parameterisation approach, Hy-tiveness, Urban Water J., 3, 127–143, 2006.
        drol. Earth Syst. Sci., 18, 2141–2166, doi:10.5194/hess-18-2141-ISTPP: National Public Water Survey, Institute for Science, Tech-
        2014, 2014.                  nology and Public Policy, Bush School of Government and Pub-
       Elshafei, Y., Coletti, J. Z., Sivapalan, M., and Hipsey, M. R.:lic Service, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 2013.
        A model of the socio-hydrologic dynamics in a semiaridJones, B. D. and Baumgartner, F. R.: The Politics of Attention, Uni-
        catchment:Isolatingfeedbacksinthecoupledhuman-versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2005.
        hydrologysystem,Water Resour. Res., 6, WR017048,Jones, A., Seville, D., and Meadows, D.: Resource sustainability in
        doi:10.1002/2015WR017048, 2015.commoditysystems:thesawmillindustryintheNorthernForest,
       Falkenmark, M.: Water and mankind – complex system of mutualSyst. Dynam. Rev., 18, 171–204, doi:10.1002/sdr.238, 2002.
        interaction, Ambio, 6, 3–9, 1977.Kandasamy, J., Sounthararajah, D., Sivabalan, P., Chanan, A., Vi-
       Fielding, K. S., Russell, S., Spinks, A., and Mankad, A.: Determi-gneswaran, S., and Sivapalan, M.: Socio-hydrologic drivers of
        nants of household water conservation: the role of demographic,the pendulum swing between agricultural development and en-
        infrastructure, behavior, and psychosocial variables, Water Re-vironmental health: a case study from Murrumbidgee River
        sour. Res., 48, W10510, doi:10.1029/2012WR012398, 2012.basin, Australia, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 18, 1027–1041,
       Forrester, J. W.: Policies, decisions, and information sources fordoi:10.5194/hess-18-1027-2014, 2014.
        modeling, Eur. J. Oper. Res., 59, 42–63, 1992.Kanta, L. and Zechman, E.: Complex adaptive systems framework
       Frick, J., Kaiser, F. G., and Wilson, M.: Environmental knowledgeto assess supply-side and demand-side management for urban
        and conservation behavior: exploring prevalence and structurewater resources, J. Water Res. Pl.-ASCE, 140, 75–85, 2014.
        in a representative sample, Pers. Indiv. Differ., 37, 1597–1613,Kenney, D. S., Goemans, C., Klein, R., Lowrey, J., and Reidy, K.:
        2004.                        Residential water demand management: Lessons from Aurora,
       Gal, S.: Optimal management of a multireservoir water supply sys-Colorado, J. Am. Water Resour. As., 44, 192–207, 2008.
        tem, Water. Resour. Res., 15, 737–749, 1979.Kuhn,T.S.:TheStructure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 3rd Edn., Uni-
       Geller, E. S., Erickson, J. B., and Buttram, B. A.: Attempts to pro-versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1996.
        moteresidential water conservation with educational, behavioralLADWP – Los Angeles Department of Water and Power: Urban
        and engineering strategies, Popul. Environ., 6, 96–112, 1983.Water Management Plan 2010, Los Angeles, CA, 2010.
       Giacomoni, M. H., Kanta, L., and Zechman, E. M.: Complex adap-Lélé,S.andNorgaard,R.B.:PracticingInterdisci-
        tive systems approach to simulate the sustainability of water re-plinarity,BioScience,55,967-975,doi:10.1641/0006-
        sources and urbanization, J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc., 139,3568(2005)055[0967:PI]2.0.CO;2, 2005.
        554–564, 2013.              Liu, Y., Tian, F., Hu, H., and Sivapalan, M.: Socio-hydrologic
       Gleick,P.H.:A Look at Twenty-ﬁrst Century Wa-perspectives of the co-evolution of humans and water in the
        terResourcesDevelopment,WaterInt.,25,127–138,Tarim River basin, Western China: the Taiji-Tire model, Hy-
        doi:10.1080/02508060008686804, 2000.drol. Earth Syst. Sci., 18, 1289–1303, doi:10.5194/hess-18-1289-
       Gober, P. and Wheater, H. S.: Debates–Perspectives on socio-2014, 2014.
        hydrology: Modeling ﬂood risk as a public policy problem, Wa-Loucks, D. P.: Debates–Perspectives on socio-hydrology: Simu-
        ter Resour. Res., 51, WR016945, doi:10.1002/2015WR016945,lating hydrologic-human interactions, Water Resour. Res., 51,
        2015.                        WR017002,10.1002/2015WR017002,2015.
       Gober, P., White, D. D., Quay, R., Sampson, D. A., and Kirkwood,Mankad, A. and Tapsuwan, S.: Review of socio-economic
        C. W.: Socio-hydrology modelling for an uncertain future, withdrivers of community acceptance and adoption of decen-
        examplesfromtheUSAandCanada,Geol.Soc.Spec.Publ.,408,tralised water systems, J. Environ. Manage., 92, 380–91,
        SP408-2, 2014.               doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.10.037, 2011.
       Hashimoto, T., Stedinger, J. R., and Loucks, D. P.: Reliability, re-McConnell,W.J.,Millington,J.D.A.,Reo,N.J.,Alberti,M.,Asb-
                                                   ´
        siliency, and vulnerability criteria for water resource system eval-jornsen, H., Baker, L. A., Brozovic, N., Drinkwater, L. E., Scott,
        uation, Water Resour. Res., 18, 14–20, 1982.A., Fragoso, J., Holland, D. S., Jantz, C. A., Kohler, T. A., Her-
       Hale, R. L., Armstrong, A., Baker, M. A., Bedingﬁeld, S.,bert, D., Maschner, G., Monticino, M., Podestá, G., Pontius, R.
        Betts, D., Buahin, C., Buchert, M., Crowl, T., Dupont, R. R.,G., Redman,C.L.,Sailor,D.,Urquhart,G.,andLiu,J.:Research
        Ehleringer, J.R, Endter-Wada, J., Flint, C., Grant, J., Hinners, S.,on Coupled Human and Natural Systems (CHANS): Approach,
        Jeffery, S., Jackson-Smith, D., Jones, A. S., Licon, C., andChallenges, and Strategies, B. Ecol. Soc. Am., Meeting Reports,
        Null, S. E.: iSAW: integrating structure, actors, and water to218–228, 2009.
       Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
       M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process91
       McGinnis, M.: Networks of adjacent action situations in polycen-Sivapalan, M. and Blöschl, G.: Time scale interactions and the
        tric governance, Policy Stud. J., 39, 51–78, doi:10.1111/j.1541-coevolution of humans and water, Water Resour. Res., 51,
        0072.2010.00396.x/full, 2011.WR017896,doi:10.1002/2015WR017896,2015.
       McGinnis, M.: An Introduction to IAD and the LanguageSivapalan, M., Blöschl, G., Zhang, L., and Vertessy, R.: Downward
        of the Ostrom Workshop: A Simple Guide to a Complexapproachtohydrologicalprediction, Hydrol. Process., 17, 2101–
        Framework, Policy Stud. J., 39, 169–183, doi:10.1111/j.1541-2111, doi:10.1002/hyp.1425, 2003.
        0072.2010.00401.x, 2011b.   Sivapalan, M., Savenije, H. H. G., and Blöschl, G.: Socio-
       McGinnis, M. D. and Ostrom, E.: Social-ecological system frame-hydrology: A new science of people and water, Hydrol. Process.,
        work: initial changes and continuing challenges, Ecol. Soc., 19,26, 1270–1276, 2012.
        30, doi:10.5751/ES-06387-190230, 2014.SNWA–SouthernNevadaWaterAuthority:WaterResourcesMan-
       Micklin, P.: The aral sea disaster, Annu. Rev. Earth Pl. Sc., 35, 47–agementPlan, available at: http://www.snwa.com/assets/pdf/wr_
        72, doi:10.1146/annurev.earth.35.031306.140120, 2007.plan.pdf (last access: 1 July 2015), 2009.
       Mini, C., Hogue, T. S., and Pincetl, S.: Patterns and controlling fac-Srinivasan, V., Gorelick, S. M., and Goulder, L.: Sustainable ur-
        tors of residential water use in Los Angeles, California, WaterbanwatersupplyinsouthIndia:desalination,efﬁciencyimprove-
        Policy, 16, 1–16, doi:10.2166/wp.2014.029, 2014.ment,orrainwaterharvesting?,WaterResour.Res.,46,W10504,
       MWRA – Massachusetts Water Resources Authority: Summarydoi:10.1029/2009WR008698, 2010.
        of MWRA Demand Management Program, available at: http://Srinivasan, V., Seto, K. C., Emerson, R., and Gorelick, S.
        www.mwra.state.ma.us/harbor/pdf/demandreport03.pdf (last ac-M.:The impact of urbanization on water vulnerabil-
        cess: 1 July 2015), 2003.    ity:A coupled human–environment system approach for
       Olmstead, S. M. and Stavins, R. N.: Comparing price and nonpriceChennai,India,GlobalEnviron.Chang.,23,229–239,
        approaches to urban water conservation, Water Resour. Res., 45,doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.10.002, 2013.
        W04301,doi:10.1029/2008WR007227, 2009.Srinivasan, V.: Reimagining the past – use of counterfactual tra-
       Ostrom, E.: A diagnostic approach for going beyond panaceas, P.jectories in socio-hydrological modelling: the case of Chennai,
        Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 15181–15187, 2007.India, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 19, 785–801, doi:10.5194/hess-
       Ostrom, E.: A general framework for analyzing sustainabil-19-785-2015, 2015.
        ityof social-ecological systems, Science, 325, 419–422,Stave, K. A.: A system dynamics model to facilitate public
        doi:10.1126/science.1172133, 2009.understanding of water management options in Las Vegas,
       Ostrom, E.: Background on the Institutional Analysis and Develop-Nevada, J. Environ. Manage., 67, 303–313, doi:10.1016/S0301-
        ment Framework, Policy Stud. J., 39, 7–27, 2011.4797(02)00205-0, 2003.
       Pahl-Wostl, C., Craps, M., Dewulf, A., Mostert, E., Tabara, D., andSterman, J.: Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling
        Taillieu, T.: Social Learning and Water Resources Management,for a Complex World, Irwin McGraw-Hill, Boston, 2000.
        Ecol. Soc., 12, 5, 2007.    Thompson, S. E., Sivapalan, M., Harman, C. J., Srinivasan, V.,
       Pahl-Wostl, C., Holtz, G., Kastens, B., and Knieper, C.: AnalyzingHipsey, M. R., Reed, P., Montanari, A., and Blöschl, G.: De-
        complex water governance regimes: the Management and Tran-veloping predictive insight into changing water systems: use-
        sition Framework, Environ. Sci. Policy, 13, 571–581, 2010.inspired hydrologic science for the Anthropocene, Hydrol.
       Padowski, J. C. and Jawitz, J. W.: Water availability and vulnerabil-Earth Syst. Sci., 17, 5013–5039, doi:10.5194/hess-17-5013-
        ity of 225 large cities in the United States, Water Resour Res, 48,2013, 2013.
        W12529,doi:10.1029/2012WR012335, 2012.Tong, S. T. and Chen, W.: Modeling the relationship between land
       Pande, S. and Ertsen, M.: Endogenous change: on cooperation anduse and surface water quality, J. Environ. Manage., 66, 377–393,
        water availability in two ancient societies, Hydrol. Earth Syst.2002.
        Sci., 18, 1745–1760, doi:10.5194/hess-18-1745-2014, 2014.Troy, T. J., Pavao-Zuckerman, M., and Evans, T. P.: Debates–
       Schlager, E. and Heikkila, T.: Left High and Dry? ClimatePerspectives on socio-hydrology: Socio-hydrologic modeling:
        Change, Common-Pool Resource Theory, and the AdaptabilityTradeoffs, hypothesis testing, and validation, Water Resour. Res.,
        of Western Water Compacts, Public Admin. Rev., 71, 461–470,51, WR017046, doi:10.1002/2015WR017046, 2015.
        doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2011.02367.x, 2011.Turral, H.: Hydro-Logic? Reform in Water Resources Management
       Schlüter, M., Hinkel, J., Bots, P., and Arlinghaus, R.: Application ofin Developed Countries with Major Agricultural Water Use –
        the SES framework for model-based analysis of the dynamics ofLessons for Developing Nations, Overseas Development Insti-
        social–ecological systems, Ecol. Soc., 19, 36, doi:10.5751/ES-tute, London, 1998.
        05782-190136, 2014.         Vahmani, P. and Hogue, T. S.: Incorporating an urban irrigation
       Schuetze, T. and Santiago-Fandiño, V.: Quantitative assessment ofmodule into the Noah Land surface model coupled with an ur-
        water use efﬁciency in urban and domestic buildings, Water, 5,ban canopy model, J. Hydrometeorol., 15, 1440–1456, 2014.
        1172–1193, 2013.            van Emmerik, T. H. M., Li, Z., Sivapalan, M., Pande, S., Kan-
       Shih, J. and Revelle, C.: Water-supply operations during drought:dasamy, J., Savenije, H. H. G., Chanan, A., and Vigneswaran,
        continuous hedging rule, J. Water Res. Pl.-ASCE, 120, 613–629,S.: Socio-hydrologic modeling to understand and mediate the
        1994.                        competition for water between agriculture development and en-
       Sivapalan, M.: Debates–Perspectives on socio-hydrology: Chang-vironmental health: Murrumbidgee River basin, Australia, Hy-
        ing water systems and the “tyranny of small problems”–drol. Earth Syst. Sci., 18, 4239–4259, doi:10.5194/hess-18-4239-
        Socio-hydrology,WaterResour.Res.,51,WR017080,2014, 2014.
        doi:10.1002/2015WR017080, 2015.
       www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016
       92                    M.Garciaetal.:Aquestiondrivensocio-hydrological modeling process
       Viglione, A., Di Baldassarre, G., Brandimarte, L., Kuil, L., Carr,Wissmar,R.C.,Timm,R.K.,andLogsdon,M.G.:Effectsofchang-
        G., Salinas, J. L., Scolobig, A., and Blöschl, G.: Insights froming forest and impervious land covers on discharge characteris-
        socio-hydrology modelling on dealing with ﬂood risk – roles oftics of watersheds, Environ. Manage., 34, 91–98, 2004.
        collective memory, risk-taking attitude and trust, J. Hydrol., 518,You, J. Y. and Cai, X.: Hedging rule for reservoir operations: 1. A
        71–82, doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.01.018, 2014.theoretical analysis, Water Resour. Res., 44, 1–9, 2008.
       Vörösmarty, C. J., McIntyre, P. B., Gessner, M. O., Dudgeon, D.,Young,P.,Parkinson,S.,andLees,M.:Simplicityoutofcomplexity
        Prusevich,A.,Green,P.,Glidden,S.,Bunn,S.E.,Sullivan,C.A.,in environmental modelling: Occam’s razor revisited, J. Appl.
        Lierman, C. R., and Davies, P. M.: Global threats to humanStat., 23, 165–210, doi:10.1080/02664769624206, 1996.
        water security and river biodiversity, Nature, 467, 555–561,Young, P.: Top-down and data-based mechanistic modelling of
        doi:10.1038/nature09549, 2010.rainfall–ﬂow dynamics at the catchment scale, Hydrol. Process.,
       Wagener, T., Sivapalan, M., Troch, P. A., McGlynn, B. L., Har-17, 2195–2217, doi:10.1002/hyp.1328, 2003.
        man, C. J., Gupta, H. V., and Wilson, J. S.: The future of hydrol-Zilberman, D., Dinar, A., MacDougall, N., Khanna, M., Brown,
        ogy: an evolving science for a changing world, Water Resour.C., and Castillo, F.: Individual and institutional responses to the
        Res, 46, W05301, doi:10.1029/2009WR008906, 2010.drought: The case of California agriculture. ERS Staff Paper, US
       Wheater, H. S., Jakeman, A. J., and Beven, K. J.: Progress and di-Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 1992.
        rections in rainfall–runoff modeling, in: Modeling Change in En-
        vironmentalSystems,JohnWileyandSons,NewYork,101–132,
        1993.
       Willis, R. M., Stewart, R. A., Panuwatwanich, K., Williams, P. R.,
        and Hollingsworth, A. L.: Quantifying the inﬂuence of environ-
        mental and water conservation attitudes on household end use
        water consumption, J. Environ. Manage., 92, 1996–2009, 2011.
       Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 73–92, 2016www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/20/73/2016/
